=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Test::YAFT - Yet another testing framework

=head1 SYNOPSIS

	use Test::YAFT;

	it q (should pass this test)
		=> got    => scalar do { ... }
		=> expect => $expected_value
		;

=head1 DISCLAIMER

Please accept the fact that I'm not English native speaker so this documentation
may contain improper grammar or wording making it harder to understand.

If you encounter such place, please visit project's issue tracking.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<Test::YAFT> combines features of multiple test libraries, providing
a BDD-inspired, AAA-based, Context oriented testing approach.

=head2 Test Message First

The test message is always the first argument to every assumption function.
This is a core design principle that ensures tests are self-documenting
and readable.

	it q (should increment counter)
		=> got    => $counter
		=> expect => 42
		;

All other arguments use a named parameter approach, making tests
explicit and easy to understand.

=head2 AAA Pattern

L<Test::YAFT> provides the Arrange-Act-Assert pattern:

=over

=item B<Arrange> - Set up test context using C<arrange {}>

=item B<Act> - Execute code under test using C<got {}> or C<act {}>

=item B<Assert> - Verify results using C<expect> or C<throws>

=back

=head2 BDD Inspired

The naming conventions (C<it>, C<assume>, C<there>) are inspired by
Behaviour-Driven Development, allowing tests to read as specifications:

	it q (should return user's full name)
		=> got	  => $user->full_name
		=> expect => q (John Doe)
		;

	assume q (the user's full name is correctly constructed)
		=> got	  => $user->full_name
		=> expect => q (John Doe)
		;

=head2 Test::Deep Integration

L<Test::YAFT> uses L<Test::Deep> under the hood, enabling powerful nested
structure matching and custom comparators.

Additionally, L<Test::Differences> is used to report differences when tests fail.


=head2 Common Assumption Arguments

=over

=item C<got> - The value under test

	=> got => $value_under_test
	=> got { return $value_under_test }

=item C<expect> - The expected value (L<Test::Deep::Cmp> or plain value)

	=> expect => expect_foo (...)

=item C<throws> - Expected exception (when testing for errors)

	=> throws => expect_foo (...)

=item C<with_*> - Context setup

	=> with_name => $name
	=> arrange { name => $name }

=item C<diag> - Custom diagnostic message

	=> diag => q (Custom diagnostic message)
	=> diag => sub { q (Computed custom diagnostic message) }

=back

=head2 Computed C<got> Value

The C<got {}> block computes the value under test within an C<eval>,
automatically checking for unexpected exceptions:

	it q (should calculate total)
		=> got    { $cart->calculate_total }
		=> expect => 99.99
		;

When C<throws> is specified, the test expects the code to die:

	it q (should reject negative quantity)
		=> got    { $cart->add_item (quantity => -1) }
		=> throws => expect_obj_isa (My::X::Positive_Quantity::)
		;

To specify such block across multiple assumptions, use the L<act {}|/act {}> block.

=head2 Context

L<Test::YAFT> uses a hierarchical context system to manage test state.

Each context enforces the following constraints:

=over

=item Only one L<act {}|/act {}> block can be defined

=item Each property name can only be arranged once

=back

There is one root context shared by all test files within the same process.
Each L<subtest|/subtest> and each L<assumption|/ASSUMPTIONS> creates a new sub-context.

Sub-contexts inherit values from their parent context and allow you to override them (once).
Changes in a sub-context do not affect the parent or sibling contexts.
Once a value has been read from a parent, it becomes immutable and can no longer be overridden.

See also:
L<test_frame|/test_frame>

=head1 GETTING STARTED

For a tutorial-like introduction, see L<Test::YAFT::Introduction>.

If you are migrating from another testing library, these guides may help:

=over

=item L<Test::YAFT for Test::Deep users|Test::YAFT::Test::Deep>

=item L<Test::YAFT for Test::Exceptions users|Test::YAFT::Test::Exception>

=item L<Test::YAFT for Test::More users|Test::YAFT::Test::More>

=item L<Test::YAFT for Test::Spec users|Test::YAFT::Test::Spec>

=item L<Test::YAFT for Test::Warnings users|Test::YAFT::Test::Warnings>

=back

=head1 EXPORTING

L<Test::YAFT> exports symbols using L<Exporter::Tiny>.

=head2 Export Tags

=over

=item C<:all>

All exported functions.

=item C<:assumptions>

Assumption functions (exported by default).

=item C<:default>

All functions exported by default.

=item C<:expectations>

Expectation functions (exported by default).

=item C<:foundations>

Foundation functions (B<not> exported by default).

=item C<:utils>

Utility functions (exported by default).

=back

=head2 Selective Import

    # Import specific functions
    use Test::YAFT qw (it expect_true);

    # Import only foundation functions
    use Test::YAFT qw (:foundations);

    # Exclude specific functions
    use Test::YAFT qw (!fail);

See L<Exporter::Tiny> for more import options.

=head1 OVERLOADED OPERATORS

L<Test::YAFT> overloads operators for L<Test::Deep> expectations,
enabling tabular-style expectation definitions for improved readability.

=over

=item C<!>, C<~>, Unary C<->

	assume q (...)
		=> expect => ! expectation
		;

	assume q (...)
		=> expect => ~ expectation
		;

	assume q (...)
		=> expect => - expectation
		;

Creates a complementary expectation (negation).

=item Binary C<+>

	assume q (user should have valid properties)
		=> expect =>
			+ expectation # must pass
			+ expectation # must pass as well
			+ expectation # must pass as well
		;

Combines multiple expectations where all must pass. Same behaviour as
L<Test::Deep>'s C<&> operator, but enables better vertical alignment for
improved readability.

=item Binary C<->

	assume q (...)
		=> expect =>
			+ expectation # must pass
			+ expectation # must pass as well
			- expectation # must not pass
		;

Combines expectations where C<-> negates the expectation.
Equivalent to C<+ !>.

=back

=head1 ASSUMPTIONS

	use Test::YAFT qw (:assumptions);

Assumption functions perform actual value comparison and report test results.
They are exported by default.

Every assumption accepts the test message as the first positional parameter,
with remaining parameters using the named approach.

When an assumption performs multiple internal expectations, it reports
as a single test using the provided message, failing early.

=head2 assume

	assume q (meaningful sentence)
		=> got    => ...
		=> expect => ...
		;

The primary test primitive. It creates its own sub-context so already arranged
values can be redefined per assumption when needed.

Accepted parameters:

=over

=item arrange

	assume q (...)
		=> arrange { foo => q (bar) }
		=> arrange { bar => q (baz) }
		...
		;

L<<C<arrange {}>|/arrange {}>> blocks are evaluated in the context of the
assumption's sub-context before resolving the value under test.

Multiple L<<C<arrange {}>|/arrange {}>> blocks are evaluated in order.

=item diag

Custom diagnostic message, printed on failure. When specified, no other
diagnostic message is printed.

Can be a string, arrayref of strings, or coderef. Coderef receives
the L<Test::Deep> stack and value under test as parameters.

=item expect

Expected value. When specified along with computed C<got> value, an additional
check verifies the code did not die before comparison.

=item got

Value under test. When L<<C<got {}>|/got {}>> is used, the block is evaluated
and its error status is checked before comparison.

=item override

	assume q (...)
		=> override { Package::function => q (bar) }
		=> override { Package::function => sub { q (bar) } }
		=> override { Package:: => function => q (bar) }
		=> override { Package:: => function => sub { q (bar) } }
		=> override { $object => function => q (bar) }
		=> override { $object => function => sub { q (bar) } }
		...
		;

L<<C<override {}>|/override {}>> blocks are evaluated in the context of the
assumption's sub-context before resolving the value under test.

Multiple L<<C<override {}>|/override {}>> blocks are evaluated in declaration order.

L<<C<override {}>|/override {}>> blocks are evaluated before
L<<C<arrange {}>|/arrange {}>> blocks.

=item throws

Expected exception. When specified along with computed C<got> value, an additional
check verifies the code did die before comparison.

When both C<expect> and C<throws> are specified, C<throws> takes precedence.

See also L<Test::YAFT::Test::Exception>.

=back

=head2 fail

	return fail q (what failed);

	return fail q (what failed)
		=> diag => q (diagnostic message)
		;

	return fail q (what failed)
		=> diag => sub { q (diagnostic message) }
		;

Always fails the test. Accepts an optional C<diag> parameter for
diagnostic messages.

When C<diag> is a coderef, it is executed and its result is passed
to C<diag>.

=head2 had_no_warnings

    had_no_warnings;
    had_no_warnings q (title);

Verifies that no warnings were emitted.

See also L<Test::Warnings::had_no_warnings|Test::Warnings/had_no_warnings>.

=head2 it

	it q (should be ...)
		=> got    => ...
		=> expect => ...
		;

Alias for L</assume>. Use when forming sentences that read naturally with "it".

=head2 nok

	nok q (shouldn't be ...)
		=> got    => ...
		;

Shortcut expecting a boolean false value.

=head2 ok

	ok q (should be ...)
		=> got    => ...
		;

Shortcut expecting a boolean true value.

=head2 pass

	pass q (what passed);

Always passes the test.

=head2 there

	there q (should be ...)
		=> got    => ...
		=> expect => ...
		;

Alias for L<it|/it>. Provides a convenient word for forming meaningful
English sentences.

=head1 EXPECTATIONS

	use Test::YAFT qw (:expectations);

Expectation functions return L<Test::Deep::Cmp> objects describing
expected values. They are exported by default.

=head2 expect_all

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/all>.

=head2 expect_any

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/any>.

=head2 expect_array

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/array>.

=head2 expect_array_each

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/array_each>.

=head2 expect_array_elements_only

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/arrayelementsonly>.

=head2 expect_array_length

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/arraylength>.

=head2 expect_array_length_only

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/arraylengthonly>.

=head2 expect_bag

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/bag>.

=head2 expect_blessed ($)

	assume q (object should be blessed to specific class)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_blessed (My::Class::)
		;

Alias for L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to>.
Provided as part of the mapping of L<Test::Deep> expectations.

See also:
L<expect_blessed_ref|/expect_blessed_ref ()>,
L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to ($)>,
L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of ($)>,
L<expect_obj_isa|/expect_obj_isa>
L<Test::Deep::blessed|/Test::Deep#blessed>

=head2 expect_blessed_ref ()

	it q (should be a blessed object)
		=> got    => $got
		=> expect => expect_blessed_ref
		;

Evaluates that C<$got> is a blessed reference (an object).

See also:
L<expect_blessed|/expect_blessed ($)>,
L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to ($)>,
L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of ($)>,
L<expect_ref_type|/expect_ref_type>,
L<expect_obj_isa|/expect_obj_isa>

=head2 expect_blessed_to ($)

	assume q (object should be blessed to specific class)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_blessed_to (My::Class::)
		;

Validates that C<$got> is blessed to exactly the given package name.

Unlike L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of>, this checks for exact
package blessing without considering inheritance. The object must be
blessed to the specified package name, not a subclass.

	# Matches: bless {}, My::Class::
	# Does not match: bless {}, My::Class::Subclass::
	expect_blessed_to (My::Class::)

See also:
L<expect_blessed|/expect_blessed ($)>,
L<expect_blessed_ref|/expect_blessed_ref ()>,
L<expect_obj_isa|/expect_obj_isa>
L<Test::Deep::blessed|/Test::Deep#blessed>

=head2 expect_bool

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/bool>.

=head2 expect_can

	assume q (object should support required methods)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_can (qw (save delete validate))
		;

	assume q (class should support required methods)
		=> got    => Connection::
		=> expect => expect_can (q (connect))
		;

Verifies that C<$got> can respond to every specified method.

C<$got> is interpreted as either a class name or an object instance.

Methods must be provided and implemented. For:

    package Foo {
        sub abstract;
        sub implemented { ... }
    }

test:

    it q (...)
        => got    => Foo::
        => expect => expect_can (qw (missing implemented abstract))
        ;

will fail with diagnostic message showing availability of expected methods

    [-] abstract
    [x] implemented
    [ ] missing

where C<[x]> means implemented, C<[-]> means declared but not defined,
and C<[ ]> means neither declared nor defined.

=head2 expect_code {}

Evaluates that C<$got> matches the behaviour described in the code block.
C<$got> value is available inside the block as C<$_> as well as C<$_[0]>.

In addition to the success truth value, the code block can optionally return a diagnostic message as the second value.

	expect_code {
		# truth value - is it odd?
		$_ % 2 == 1,

		# optional diagnostic message
		q (Expect even number),
	}

=head2 expect_compare

	expect_compare (q (<=), $max)

Similar to L<Test::More/cmp_ok> but provided as an expectation, allowing
combination with other L<Test::YAFT> expectations.

See also:
L<expect_number_greater_than|/expect_number_greater_than>
L<expect_number_less_than|/expect_number_less_than>

=head2 expect_complement_to

	expect_complement_to (42)

Negative expectation. Usually it is easier to use the overloaded
complement operators C<!> or C<~>.

=head2 expect_does

	assume q (object should perform required role)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_does (My::Role::)
		;

Verifies that C<$got> is blessed object providing behaviour the specified role.

See also:
L<expect_blessed|/expect_blessed>,
L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to>,
L<expect_blessed_ref|/expect_blessed_ref>,
L<expect_can|/expect_can>
L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of>,
L<expect_isa|/expect_isa>,

=head2 expect_ends_with

	assume q (filename should end with .txt)
		=> got    => $filename
		=> expect => expect_ends_with (q (.txt))
		;

Verifies that C<$got> ends with the expected suffix.

When the expected suffix is C<undef>, it always passes.

Otherwise, it always fails when C<$got> is C<undef>.

See also:
L<expect_like|/expect_like>,
L<expect_re|/expect_re>,
L<expect_starts_with|/expect_starts_with>,
L<expect_string|/expect_string>

=head2 expect_false

Boolean expectation for false values.

=head2 expect_hash

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/hash>.

=head2 expect_hash_each

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/hash_each>.

=head2 expect_hash_keys

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/hashkeys>.

=head2 expect_hash_keys_only

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/hashkeysonly>.

=head2 expect_instance_of

	assume q (object should be valid user instance)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_instance_of (My::User::)
		;

Verifies that C<$got> is an instance of the specified class or any of its subclasses.

See also:
L<expect_blessed|/expect_blessed>,
L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to>,
L<expect_blessed_ref|/expect_blessed_ref>,
L<expect_isa|/expect_isa>

=head2 expect_isa

	assume q (object should be instance of User or subclass)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_isa (My::User::)
		;

	assume q (value should be hash reference)
		=> got    => $value
		=> expect => expect_isa (q (HASH))
		;

Verifies that C<$got> satisfies one of two conditions:

=over

=item For blessed objects: checks inheritance using C<isa()>

=item For references: checks that C<ref ($got)> equals the provided string

=back

See also:
L<expect_blessed|/expect_blessed>,
L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to>,
L<expect_blessed_ref|/expect_blessed_ref>,
L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of>,
L<expect_ref_type|/expect_ref_type>

=head2 expect_like

	expect_like (qr ($regex))

Evaluates that C<$got> matches the provided regexp.

Provided to simplify migration from L<Test::More/like>.

See also:
L<expect_ends_with|/expect_ends_with>,
L<expect_re|/expect_re>,
L<expect_starts_with|/expect_starts_with>,
L<expect_string|/expect_string>,
L<Test::More/like>

=head2 expect_listmethods

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/listmethods>.

=head2 expect_methods

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/methods>.

=head2 expect_no_class

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/noclass>.

=head2 expect_none

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/none>.

=head2 expect_none_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/noneof>.

=head2 expect_num

Alias for L<expect_number|/expect_number>.

=head2 expect_number

	assume q (value should be the answer)
		=> got    => $value
		=> expect => expect_number (42)
		;

	assume q (measurement should be approximately pi)
		=> got    => $measurement
		=> expect => expect_number (3.14159, 0.001) # 3.14059 to 3.14259
		;

When tolerance is provided, C<$got> must be within the tolerance range of
the expected value. Without tolerance, C<$got> must be numerically equal.

See also:
L<expect_compare|/expect_compare>,
L<expect_num|/expect_num>,
L<expect_number_greater_than|/expect_number_greater_than>,
L<Test::Deep/num>

=head2 expect_number_greater_than

	assume q (score should exceed passing threshold)
		=> got    => $score
		=> expect => expect_number_greater_than (42)
		;

Verifies that C<$got> is numerically greater than the provided value.

Uses numeric comparison, so string numbers are converted to their numeric
values before comparison.

	# Matches: 61, 100, 1000
	# Does not match: 60, 59, 0
	expect_number_greater_than (60)

See also:
L<expect_compare|/expect_compare>,
L<expect_number|/expect_number>
L<expect_number_less_than|/expect_number_less_than>

=head2 expect_number_less_than

	assume q (temperature should be below freezing point)
		=> got    => $temperature
		=> expect => expect_number_less_than (0)
		;

Verifies that C<$got> is numerically less than the provided value.

Uses numeric comparison, so string numbers are converted to their numeric
values before comparison.

	# Matches: -1, -100, -273
	# Does not match: 0, 1, 100
	expect_number_less_than (0)

See also:
L<expect_compare|/expect_compare>,
L<expect_number|/expect_number>,
L<expect_number_greater_than|/expect_number_greater_than>

=head2 expect_obj_isa

	assume q (object should be valid user instance)
		=> got    => $object
		=> expect => expect_obj_isa (My::User::)
		;

Alias for L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of>.

Provided for compatibility when migrating from L<Test::Deep>.

See also:
L<expect_blessed|/expect_blessed>,
L<expect_blessed_ref|/expect_blessed_ref>,
L<expect_blessed_to|/expect_blessed_to>,
L<expect_instance_of|/expect_instance_of>,
L<expect_isa|/expect_isa>

=head2 expect_re

	assume q (error message should contain specific text)
		=> got    => $error
		=> expect => expect_re (qr (invalid input))
		;

	assume q (email should have valid format)
		=> got    => $email
		=> expect => expect_re (qr (^ \w+ @ \w+ [.] \w+ $)x)
		;

Verifies that C<$got> matches the provided regular expression.

See also:
L<expect_ends_with|/expect_ends_with>,
L<expect_starts_with|/expect_starts_with>,
L<expect_string|/expect_string>,
L<Test::Deep/re>

See also:
L<expect_ends_with|/expect_ends_with>,
L<expect_like|/expect_like>,
L<expect_starts_with|/expect_starts_with>,
L<expect_string|/expect_string>

=head2 expect_ref_type

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/reftype>.

=head2 expect_regexp_matches

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/regexpmatches>.

=head2 expect_regexp_only

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/regexponly>.

=head2 expect_regexpref

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/regexpref>.

=head2 expect_regexpref_only

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/regexprefonly>.

=head2 expect_scalarref

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/scalarref>.

=head2 expect_scalarref_only

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/scalarrefonly>.

=head2 expect_set

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/set>.

=head2 expect_shallow

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/shallow>.

=head2 expect_starts_with

	assume q (greeting should start with Hello)
		=> got    => $greeting
		=> expect => expect_starts_with (q (Hello))
		;

Verifies that C<$got> starts with the expected prefix.

When the expected prefix is C<undef>, it always passes.

Otherwise, it always fails when C<$got> is C<undef>.

See also:
L<expect_ends_with|/expect_ends_with>,
L<expect_like|/expect_like>,
L<expect_re|/expect_re>,
L<expect_string|/expect_string>

=head2 expect_str

Alias for L<expect_string|/expect_string>.

=head2 expect_string

	assume q (message should match exactly)
		=> got    => $message
		=> expect => expect_string (q (Hello, World!))
		;

Verifies that C<$got> is string-equal to the expected value.

See also:
L<expect_ends_with|/expect_ends_with>,
L<expect_like|/expect_like>,
L<expect_re|/expect_re>,
L<expect_starts_with|/expect_starts_with>,
L<expect_str|/expect_str>,
L<Test::Deep/str>

=head2 expect_subbag

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/subbagof>.

=head2 expect_subbag_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/subbagof>.

=head2 expect_subhash

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/subhashof>.

=head2 expect_subhash_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/subhashof>.

=head2 expect_subset

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/subsetof>.

=head2 expect_subset_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/subsetof>.

=head2 expect_superbag

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/superbagof>.

=head2 expect_superbag_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/superbagof>.

=head2 expect_superhash

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/superhashof>.

=head2 expect_superhash_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/superhashof>.

=head2 expect_superset

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/supersetof>.

=head2 expect_superset_of

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/supersetof>.

=head2 expect_true

Boolean expectation for true values.

=head2 expect_use_class

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/useclass>.

=head2 expect_value

    => expect => expect_value (42)

Wraps any value as an expectation.

=head2 ignore

	assume q (response should have expected structure)
		=> got    => $response
		=> expect => expect_hash ({
			status    => 200,
			data      => expect_hash_keys (qw (id name)),
			timestamp => ignore,
		})
		;

Matches any value without checking it.

Used in deep structure comparisons to skip verification of specific fields
whose values are unpredictable or irrelevant to the test.

=head2 not_important

Alias for L<ignore|/ignore>.

Provides a more explicit alternative to L<ignore|/ignore> when you want
to emphasise that a field value is not relevant to the test.

=head1 UTILITIES

	use Test::YAFT qw (:utils);

Utility functions help organise tests. They are exported by default.

=head2 act {}

	act {
		my ($login, $password) = @_;
		...;
		return $value_under_test;
	}
		q (login),
		q (password),
		;

	assume q (user is authenticated)
		=> with_login	 => ...
		=> with_password => ...
		=> expect		 => ...
		;

Inspired by the Arrange-Act-Assert testing approach, this utility defines
a shared computation for C<got> across multiple assumptions. The block
receives dependency values as arguments in their order of definition.

Dependencies are listed after the block.

Provide them using L</arrange {}> or C<with_NAME> parameters within assumptions.
Each dependency can be provided only once.

	assume q (...)
		=> with_dependency => ...
		=> arrange { dependency => ... }

Dependencies can be provided for each test in context can be provided by
L</arrange { }>

There can be only one C<act {}> definition per context.

Assumption without an explicit C<got> invokes C<act {}> automatically.
All dependencies must be provided before invocation.

See also:
L</arrange {}>,
L</arranged>,
L</expect {}>,
L</got {}>,
L</override {}>,
L</throws {}>

=head2 arrange {}

	act { ... } q (foo);

	arrange { foo => q (bar) };

	assume q (uses arranged value)
		=> expect => ...
		;

	assume q (overrides arranged value in local context)
		=> arrange { foo => q (bar-2) }
		=> expect  => ...
		;

Provides the "Arrange" step of the Arrange-Act-Assert testing approach.

Sets up test context values.

The block is evaluated in list context and should return pairs of
property names and values.

When called in void context, value is populated immediately in current context.
When used as an assumption parameter, value is populated within that assumption's
sub-context.

Each property can only be arranged once per context. Attempting to
arrange the same property twice in the same context will fail.

See also:
L<act {}|/act {}>,
L<expect {}|/expect {}>,
L<got {}|/got {}>,
L<override {}|/override {}>,
L<throws {}|/throws {}>

=head2 arranged

	act {
		my ($discount) = @_;
		calculate_total (arranged q (tax_rate) // 0.20, $discount);
	}
		q (discount)
		;

	arrange { discount => 0.10 };

	assume q (uses default tax rate)
		=> expect => calculate_total (0.20, 0.10)
		;

	assume q (uses custom tax rate)
		=> arrange { tax_rate => 0.15 }
		=> expect  => calculate_total (0.15, 0.10)
		;

Alternative usage in C<got {}> block:

	assume q (uses arranged configuration)
		=> arrange { api_timeout => 30 }
		=> got     { fetch_data (arranged q (api_timeout)) }
		=> expect  => ...
		;

Returns the arranged value of the specified property.

Useful for accessing optional arranged values inside C<got {}> and
C<act {}> blocks. Mandatory dependencies for C<act {}> are passed
via C<@_> in definition order.

Returns C<undef> if the property has not been arranged yet.

See also:
L<act {}|/act {}>,
L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>,
L<expect {}|/expect {}>,
L<got {}|/got {}>,
L<override {}|/override {}>,
L<throws {}|/throws {}>

=head2 BAIL_OUT

=head2 bail_out

	BAIL_OUT q (reason);
	bail_out q (reason);

Signals the C<harness> to terminate the whole test suite immediately.

See also: L<Test::More::BAIL_OUT|Test::More/BAIL_OUT>,
L<Test2::V0::bail_out|Test2::Tools::Basic/bail_out>

=head2 diag

	diag q (diagnostic message);
	diag @diagnostic_messages;

Prints diagnostic messages that won't interfere with test output.

Diagnostic messages from C<diag> always appear in test output, making them
suitable for reporting problems that require immediate attention.

Accepts a list of values that are concatenated together.

Returns false.

See also: L<Test::More::diag|Test::More/diag>.

=head2 done_testing

	done_testing;
	done_testing (42);
	done_testing (tests => 42);

Declares that testing is complete.

When called without arguments, the number of tests run is automatically
determined.

When called with a numeric argument, verifies that exactly that many
tests were executed. If the actual count differs, the test suite fails.

See also:  L<Test::More::done_testing|Test::More/done_testing>.

=head2 expect {}

	assume q (...)
		=> got    { ... }
		=> expect { ... }
		;

The C<expect {}> function can be used to compute the expected value for a test assertion block.
Computation is done execution context (similar to L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>).

It also offers aesthetic clarity when used in conjunction with L<got {}|/got {}>,
as well as it provides handy way to bypass stringification effect of fat comma.

	assume q (...)
		=> expect => expect_false
		=> got    { 0 }
		;

vs.

	assume q (...)
		=> expect { expect_false }
		=> got    { 0 }
		;

See also:
L<act {}|/act {}>,
L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>,
L<arranged|/arranged>,
L<got {}|/got {}>,
L<override {}|/override {}>,
L<throws {}|/throws {}>

=head2 explain

	diag explain \ %hash;
	diag explain @array;
	diag explain $scalar;

Converts any value into a human-readable string representation.

Particularly useful for displaying the contents of complex data
structures in diagnostic messages.

Returns a string (or list of strings) suitable for printing.

See also: L<Test::More::explain|Test::More/explain>

=head2 got {}

	assume q (should return valid result)
		=> got    { $calculator->divide (10, 2) }
		=> expect => 5
		;

	assume q (should throw exception on invalid input)
		=> got    { $calculator->divide (10, 0) }
		=> throws => expect_re (qr (division by zero))
		;

Specifies code to compute the value under test.

The block is evaluated in an C<eval> to capture both the return value
and any exceptions thrown.

When C<throws> is not specified the assumption fails if the code dies unexpectedly.

When C<throws> is specified, the assumption fails if the code lives instead of dying.

After checking the live/die status, the assumption compares either
the return value (with C<expect>) or the exception (with C<throws>)
against the expected value.

Unlike L<act {}|/act {}>, there is no option to specify dependencies.
Use L<arranged|/arranged> to access arranged values within the block.

See also:
L<act {}|/act {}>,
L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>,
L<arranged|/arranged>,
L<expect {}|/expect {}>,
L<override {}|/override {}>
L<throws {}|/throws {}>

=head2 note

	note q (some note);
	note @messages;

Prints informational messages that appear only in verbose test output.

Notes are not shown during normal test runs, making them suitable for debugging
information or additional context that isn't critical for understanding test failures.

Accepts a list of values that are concatenated together.

See also:
L<diag|/diag>,
L<Test::More::note|Test::More/note>

=head2 override {}

	# Override a function
	override {
		q (Some::Module::function) => sub {
			my $rv = original::function (@_);
			...;
		}
	};

	# Override with scalar value
	override {
		q (Some::Module::function) => $value
	};

	# Override method for specific object
	override { $user => authenticate => 1 };

    # assumption specific override
	it q (should ...)
		=> override { q (Some::Module::function) => sub { ... } }
		=> got      { ... }
		=> expect   => ...
		;

Temporarily overrides a function's or method's behaviour within the
current scope.

B<Two-value syntax> (function override):

The block returns a pair: fully qualified function name and override value.

	override { q (Package::function) => sub { ... } };
	override { q (Package::function) => $scalar_value };

B<Three-value syntax> (object-specific method override):

The block returns: object, method name, and override value.

	override { $object => method => sub { ... } };
	override { $object => method => $scalar_value };

When the override value is a coderef, it replaces the function/method.
When it's a scalar, the function/method returns that value directly.

The original function is made available via C<original::function> or
C<original::method> syntax, allowing the override to optionally call
the original implementation.

When called in void context, the override is applied immediately.
When used as an assumption parameter, the override is applied within
the assumption's scope.

Multiple overrides can be stacked, with the most recent override taking
precedence, previous override available via C<original::*>.

See also:
L<act {}|/act {}>,
L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>,
L<arranged|/arranged>,
L<expect {}|/expect {}>,
L<got {}|/got {}>,
L<throws {}|/throws {}>

=head2 plan

	plan 42;
	plan tests => 42;

	plan skip_all => q (reason);

Declares the test plan - how many tests will be run or why all tests
are being skipped.

When called with a number, declares that exactly that many tests will
be executed. The test suite fails if the actual count differs.

When called with C<skip_all>, skips the entire test file with the
provided reason. No tests will be run.

Use L<done_testing|/done_testing> instead if you don't know the test count in advance.

See also:
L<done_testing|/done_testing>,
L<Test::More::plan|Test::More/plan>

=head2 skip

	SKIP: {
		skip 10 => q (skip reason)
			if $condition
			;
	}

Skips a specified number of tests with a reason.

Function places the number of tests first, followed by the reason.
This follows the "small value first" convention used throughout L<Test::YAFT>.

	# Test::YAFT
	skip 10 => q (some explanatory reason, potentially very long);

	# Test::More
	skip q (some explanatory reason, potentially very long), 10;

See also:
L<Test::More::skip|Test::More/skip>

=head2 subtest

	subtest q (title) => sub {
		...;
	};

Groups related tests together with an isolated execution context.

Similar to L<Test::More::subtest|Test::More/subtest>, but creates a new
sub-context for each subtest. This means L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>,
L<act {}|/act {}>, and L<override {}|/override {}> blocks defined within
the subtest are scoped to that subtest only.

	act { ... } qw (foo bar);
	arrange { foo => 1 };
	arrange { bar => 2 };

	subtest q (with different arrangement) => sub {
		arrange { foo => 99 };

		assume q (uses parent's act but overridden foo)
			=> expect => [99, 2]
			;
	};

	assume q (parent context unchanged)
		=> expect => [1, 2]
		;

This scoping enables test isolation and allows subtests to override
parent context without affecting sibling tests.

See also:
L<Test::More::subtest|Test::More/subtest>

=head2 throws {}

	assume q (...)
		=> got    { ... }
		=> throws { ... }
		;

Similar to L<expect {}/expect {}> but for C<throws> assumptions argument.

See also:
L<act {}|/act {}>,
L<arrange {}|/arrange {}>,
L<arranged|/arranged>,
L<expect {}|/expect {}>,
L<got {}|/got {}>,
L<override {}|/override {}>

=head2 todo_skip

	TODO: {
		local $TODO = q (reason why this is TODO);
		todo_skip 10 => q (skip reason);
	}

Skips a specified number of TODO tests with a reason.

Function places the number of tests first, followed by the reason.
This follows the "small value first" convention used throughout L<Test::YAFT>.

	# Test::YAFT
	todo_skip 10 => q (some explanatory reason);

	# Test::More
	todo_skip q (some explanatory reason), 10;

See also:
L<skip|/skip>
L<Test::More::todo_skip|Test::More/todo_skip>

=head1 FOUNDATIONS

	use Test::YAFT qw (:foundations);

Foundation functions help build custom assumptions, expectations,
and tools. They are B<not> exported by default.

=head2 cmp_details

	use Test::YAFT qw (cmp_details);
	my ($ok, $stack) = cmp_details ($got, $expected);

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/cmp_details>.

=head2 deep_diag

	use Test::YAFT qw (deep_diag);
	deep_diag ($stack);

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/deep_diag>.

=head2 eq_deeply

	use Test::YAFT qw (eq_deeply);
	if (eq_deeply ($got, $expected)) {
		...
	}

Re-exported from L<Test::Deep/eq_deeply>.

=head2 test_deep_cmp

Creates an anonymous L<Test::YAFT> comparator class. Returns the
created class name.

	sub expect_foo {
		state $class = test_deep_cmp (
			isa       => ...,
			descend   => ...,
			renderGot => ...,
		);

		$class->new (@_);
	}

Accepted parameters:

=over

=item isa => E<lt>PACKAGEE<gt>

Parent class, default: L<Test::YAFT::Cmp>.

=item E<lt>METHODE<gt> => E<lt>CODEREF<gt>

Every other parameter is treated as a method to install.

=back

=head2 test_frame (&)

	use Test::YAFT qw (test_frame);
	sub my_assumption {
		test_frame {
			...
		};
	}

Utility for building custom assumptions. Handles:

=over

=item Adjusting L<Test::Builder/level>

=item Creating L<Context::Singleton/frame>

=back

=head1 CONTRIBUTING

Contributions are welcome!

=over

=item Repository: L<https://github.com/happy-barney/perl-Test-YAFT>

=item Report issues: L<https://github.com/happy-barney/perl-Test-YAFT/issues>

=item Questions and ideas: L<https://github.com/happy-barney/perl-Test-YAFT/discussions>

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Branislav Zahradník <barney@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

L<Test::YAFT> distribution is distributed under the Artistic License 2.0.

=cut
