
=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Test::YAFT::Test::Exception - Migration guide for Test::Exception users

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<Test::YAFT> does not provide dedicated exception testing assertions like
L<Test::Exception> does (C<dies_ok>, C<lives_ok>, C<throws_ok>, etc.).

Instead, Test::YAFT's assumptions automatically capture both the execution
status and any error when computing the C<got> value. The expected status
is determined by the C<throws> parameter:

=over

=item When C<throws> is present, the code is expected to die

=item When C<throws> is absent, the code is expected to live

=back

This approach integrates exception testing seamlessly with value assertions.

=head1 IMPORT

L<Test::YAFT> exports symbols via L<Exporter::Tiny>, providing all benefits
such as renaming symbols.

Unlike L<Test::Exception>, L<Test::YAFT> does not support plan specification
via the import statement. Use explicit L<plan|Test::YAFT/plan> or
L<done_testing|Test::YAFT/done_testing> instead.

=head1 MIGRATION GUIDE

=head2 dies_ok

	# Test::Exception
	dies_ok { $foo->method } q (should die);

	# Test::YAFT
	it q (should die)
		=> got    { $foo->method }
		=> throws => not_important
		;

=head2 lives_and

	# Test::Exception
	lives_and { is $foo->method, 42 } q (should not die and result is 42);

	# Test::YAFT
	it q (should not die and result is 42)
		=> got    { $foo->method }
		=> expect => 42
		;

=head2 lives_ok

	# Test::Exception
	lives_ok { $foo->method } q (should not die);

	# Test::YAFT
	it q (should not die)
		=> got    { $foo->method }
		=> expect => not_important
		;

=head2 throws_ok

L<Test::YAFT> uses the C<throws> parameter to specify exception expectations.

Unlike L<Test::Exception> which restricts you to C<REGEX> and C<CLASS>,
L<Test::YAFT> leverages L<Test::Deep>, giving you access to the full repertoire
of expectation matchers (including custom ones).

With regex matching:

	# Test::Exception
	throws_ok { $foo->method } qr (division by zero), q (should throw exception);

	# Test::YAFT
	it q (should throw exception)
		=> got    { $foo->method }
		=> throws => expect_re (qr (division by zero))
		;

With class matching:

	# Test::Exception
	throws_ok { $foo->method } My::X::Division_By_Zero::, q (should throw typed exception);

	# Test::YAFT
	it q (should throw typed exception)
		=> got    { $foo->method }
		=> throws => expect_blessed_to (My::X::Division_By_Zero::)
		;

With complex expectations:

L<Test::YAFT>'s L<Test::Deep> integration allows you to verify multiple properties
of the exception:

	it q (should throw detailed exception)
		=> got    { $foo->method }
		=> throws =>
			+ expect_blessed_to (My::X::Division_By_Zero::)
			+ expect_method (http_status  => HTTP::Status::BAD_REQUEST)
			+ expect_method (json_content => { error => not_important })
		;

=head1 AUTHOR

Branislav Zahradník <barney@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This file is part of L<Test::YAFT> distribution.

=cut
